Once around the Melanic clouds and you
can see the Melanic clouds in this
fantastic photograph. We have the
observatory building of the VLT in
Chile. Over on the right, the arc of the
Milky Way low on the horizon in the
center with all the dirty dust lanes and
10,000 stars above. But over to the left
hand side there are two fuzzy patches in
the sky and these are the large and
small melanic
clouds. Now these are members of our
local group of galaxies. Our local group
comprises the Andromeda galaxy shown at
the bottom, the Milky Way at the top and
the triangulum galaxy at the right
there. the smaller member of the three
and there are about 30 members
altogether covering a zone that's about
3 million light years in diameter. So
have these main three galaxies and then
a number of dwarf galaxies that are in
orbit around the individual ones or just
floating around in the group. You can
see that the Andromeda galaxy has a
couple of little dwarf galaxies
associated with it there.
We in the Milky Way have our own little
family of them. And this diagram shows a
map of the Milky Way with the large and
small melanic clouds. And then we have
the Karina, Fornax, Sculptor, Stextons,
Boutes, Ursa Major 1, Ursa Minor, Ursa
Major 2 and Draco dwarf galaxies and
quite close to the Milky Way there, the
Sagittarius dwarf, which is only
relatively recently
discovered. So the large and the small
Magelanic clouds are perhaps the largest
and well-known ones of this collection.
And here they are. We have the two
images here on the right hand side. The
small melaninic cloud at the top there
and the large melaninic cloud at the
bottom. The SMC and the LMC as we often
call them. And they are irregular
galaxies. Although there's some evidence
to show that the LMC at the bottom there
might once have been formed with a
spiral structure and a bar across the
middle. You can just see a hint of that
in the image. Here they are again. A
lovely picture of the two of them
separated against the background of
stars there.
And these have both been known from
ancient times. They're very easy to see.
I've seen them from uh the uh outdoors
in New Zealand. And it's quite stunning
to uh think just how far away they are.
So when you uh look at them, they look
like chunks of the Milky Way that have
become separated from it, but they are
actually more distant than
that, quite significantly. So the large
melenic cloud that's at
179,000 light years. So the Milky Way
has a diameter of about a 100,000, but
is only about five or 6,000 light years
thick. So this is a significant distance
further out than the edge of the Milky
Way. It's the fourth largest in fact of
all of those 30 members of the local
group and about a tenth of the mass of
the Milky Way galaxy overall. So quite a
significant little galaxy. As I said, it
probably had a bar structure across a
spiral, which you can just see the
echoes of today, but it came too close
to the Milky Way and got stripped of a
lot of its outer layers and rather
distorted by the effects of
gravity. Now, buried within it and
around it, we have lots of interesting
objects. This is NGC, the new general
catalog. uh a list of objects created by
John Herschel, son of William. And so in
1835 he found this one. And this is the
largest of about 60 of these globular
clusters that are associated with and in
orbit round the outer reaches of the
LMC.
Curiously, the age of this appears from
studying the stars within it and the
degree to which the most massive ones
have evolved. You get an age of about
1.7 billion years, which is much much
younger than the Milky Way or the large
melaninic cloud. Those are about 13
billion years old. They're very ancient
galaxies indeed. So, this globular
cluster seems to not match at all well.
Um, and it has about
100,000 solar masses of materials in it
comprising all those lovely stars that
you see in the picture there. It's quite
a stunning picture. Also in the LMC is
the Tarantula Nebula. And this is a
fantastic image of the Tarantula Nebula
on the right hand side. It's inside the
LMC only about 160,000 light years from
us. So, a little bit nearer than some
parts of the large Magelinic cloud. And
what you can see is a star forming
region where all that gas and dust has
been collapsing and it's getting
squeezed together by gravity and forming
new stars. And what we have is a new
star cluster in the center. All those
bright white stars clustered together in
the middle were formed out of the gas
and dust. And now the energy from these
stars is blowing outwards and pushing
away all the remaining gas in a giant
bubble in 3D. I think you can imagine
that just by looking at the photograph.
Um, so there's about just under half a
million solar masses of stars being
formed in that enormous burst of star
formation there. Also
buried inside the Tarantula Nebula is
this guy,
VFTS243. It's a black hole. It's an
X-ray quiet black hole in fact and it's
probably around nine times the mass of
the sun and it's in orbit around a
larger companion a 25 solar mass blue
giant
star. So in fact the image that you're
seeing is of course the blue giant star
and we can't see the black hole. It's
black. It doesn't let out any light and
it's quiet at the moment. It's not in
the process of
feeding. So, it was probably a larger
mass star, more than 25 solar masses,
ran through its life cycle very rapidly
and blew up as a
supernova plenty of years
ago, whilst in orbit around its
companion, this star that we can see,
the blue giant. And that won't be very
long before that blows up and probably
either collapses to a neutron star or
maybe even to a black hole itself. 25
solar masses is well large enough to
probably collapse to a black
hole. Now we have seen other events like
this occur in the large melenic cloud.
In
1987 a supernova went off there.
Supernova 1987a. very famous indeed. In
fact, this was the closest
supernova that we had seen since modern
times when we had modern
instrumentation. And uh that's still
quite a long way away, 160 170,000 light
years, but it was extremely interesting
to be able to monitor it with all of the
array of modern tools. So 1987A was
discovered on the
24th of the month in observatories in
Chile and New Zealand in February of
that
year and got brighter and peaked in its
brightness about 3 months later as the
size of the shock wave coming out
expanded. When you have a larger disc,
even if it's cooling, the larger size
means more radiation overall is emitted.
Um, even though it's less bright for
every square meter, there are just so
many more square meters. They get
brighter for a while until they start
cooling off and then the light curve
shown at the top right there declines
downwards. Now, we think this was a
giant star undergoing a type two
supernova, a core collapse supernova,
where it came to the end of its life and
could no longer sustain itself against
the force of gravity because it had run
out of options in terms of fusing
material
together. And the first signal to be
received from it was not the light. It
was actually the day before on the 23rd
of February and that was a burst of
neutrinos. These ghostly particles that
don't interact with normal matter apart
from with gravity and the weak nuclear
force could get out of the center of the
n the exploding supernova incredibly
easily. Whereas the light takes a while
to develop and to get itself to the
surface and to be able to be emitted and
travel. So it's fairly common for the
neutrinos to get here first from the
very start of the
event. And uh that arrival of those
neutrinos tells us that this was
probably the result of the core
collapse.
Now we have managed to locate now the
progenitor star the star that blew in
previous photographs and cataloges and
it goes by the designation SK
-69202. These catalog numbers are
impossible to remember. Um but it was
before it exploded a blue super giant 20
times the mass of the sun with a
temperature of 16,000 Kelvin. So very
hot indeed on the surface. very massive
uh very short-lived star that would have
lived about uh 10 million years
something like that and then detonated
as a
supernova. But it was a bit of a
surprise at the time because back then
received wisdom and theories suggested
that the stars that blew up were red
giants and red super giants, not a
direct explosion of a blue super giant.
They were thought to have to become red
in color, cooling their outer layers
before detonation. Um, so it was a bit
of a shock, but now theory has caught up
with observations and we entirely think
we understand how blue super giants
detonate under these
circumstances. And you can see the
lovely uh
explosion in the center of the main
image there and a slightly enlarged
version at the top right. can see the
shock waves, the rings moving away. And
supernova like this, the stars tend to
be rotating quite rapidly and that spin
creates an asymmetry. And so the
explosions tend to find that it's less
distance to reach the surface and blast
outwards through the polar regions
rather than at the equator. And so you
get a north and a south bursting of the
star out from the uh north and south
rotational poles before the disruption
of the equator. So that's why we see
this uh amazing
structure. But there remains a mystery
because with a 20 solar mass star
detonating and all of that burst of
neutrinos, the
neutrinos confirm that this was the
creation of a lot of neutrons in the
center. The electrons and protons being
rammed together, positive and negative,
canceling out to neutral neutrons. And
we would expect a neutron star to be the
result of this. But we can't find it. We
cannot detect the neutron star. Now, it
might be for a number of explanations.
One of which could be it's obscured by
dust and we're just not able to see it.
But it's also possible that the collapse
formed a neutron star and then more
material fell back onto the neutron star
pushing it over the 2.2 solar mass.
Tolman Oppenheimer Vulkov limit and
causing it to collapse down to a black
hole or it could have formed a black
hole directly because 20 solar masses is
pretty big and it's getting towards the
uh point where that might be able to
happen. But the intriguing possibility
is that it could have formed a quark
star. This is an intermediate object
between a neutron star and a black hole.
And it's a serious contender for what
might have happened here with a 20 solar
mass uh blue giant collapsing downwards
and crushing the neutron protons and
electrons to form neutrons but then
ripping the neutrons apart to their
constituent quarks. And if you want to
hear more about that, I have a video
called Quark Stars and Strange Matter,
and I recommend that one. It's been
very, very
popular. So, that was supernova 1987A in
the large melanic cloud. Other things in
the cloud, well, there's this lovely
picture here. We have this on the wall
at the Institute of
Astronomy. It's two different star
clusters of two very different colors.
NGC 2014 in red at the right hand side
is a fairly classical
um emission nebula. Hydrogen gas glowing
in red and a lot of new stars having
been born in the center. A new star
cluster emerging and then in blue NGC
2020 also discovered by that man John
Hershel. Again, the first one being John
Dunlop. Um, this one is a cloud of gas
being lit up by the high energy
radiation pouring away from a very
massive star indeed, a Wolf Ray star
backed
9959. And these Wolf Ray stars are the
biggest and most powerful class of
stars. so powerful that they tend to
blow away all their outer regions of
hydrogen leaving just a a helium layer
as the surface. So their spectrum is
very much devoid of any hydrogen at all.
And I think we can see the star in the
center and the rings of material that
have been blasted out from it. And those
are now reflecting blue light because
this star is super hot and emitting vast
amounts of
blue. Also inside the LMC, we have a
supernova remnant where a star
definitely exploded some time ago. And
this is a Hubble Space Telescope image
of DEM L1 190 which is very interesting
because it contains what's called a soft
gamma
repeater. Again, you don't hear very
much about these soft gamma repeaters.
These are giving off bursts of gamma
rays and X-rays from time to time. Lower
energy gamma rays, so soft gamma rays.
And it's probably a magnetar, a highly
magnetized massive neutron star spinning
very rapidly indeed, creating very
complex magnetic fields, which may
account for the very wispy and
filamentary structure in the resultant
supernova remnant from the explosion
that created this magnetar. So there are
some fascinating objects in and around
the large melanic cloud.
the small melanic cloud fairly similar
but smaller a little bit further away
210,000 light years um it's several
hundred million stars but only 1,000th
of the number that make up the uh Milky
Way that is and around about 7 billion
solar masses um that's a lot less
massive than the others but there's a
very interesting piece of history which
I wanted to throw in here which is that
in 1908 8 Henrieta Swan Levit was using
the stars of the Melanic cloud
to do something quite remarkable. What
she did was studied what were called
cluster variables at the time and showed
that these variable stars changed their
brightness back and forth in a regular
periodic way. So if you plotted a graph
of the brightness over time, you got a
characteristic shark's fin rise and fall
at regular intervals. And what uh
Henrietta was able to show was that the
period of the variation was directly
proportional to its apparent
brightness. So that's very interesting.
But what's more interesting is that when
you're looking at the stars, the cluster
variables in the small melenic cloud,
they're all
210,000 light years away, plus or minus
a fairly small
amount. So if they all are the same
distance away, then they're apparent
brightness is a direct measure of how
powerful they are relative to each
other. And so what she discovered was
that not only was the apparent magnitude
directly related to the period, but the
true power output must also be related
to the period. And now we use this all
the time as part of our cosmic distance
ladder because if you measure the
period, you can know the true power of
the star. And if you know the true
power, you can compare that with its
apparent brightness, wherever it happens
to be. And using the standard candle
rule, you can work out how far away it
is. If it's twice as far away, you would
receive a quarter as much light, three
times as far away, 1 nth as much light.
So the standard candle rule can be
applied to these variables, which we now
call sephid variables. uh after the
first star of this type Delta Sephi that
was
discovered. So an amazing achievement
and really really
helpful. There are lots of interesting
things in and around the LMC as well as
the SMC and you can see some of them
here. In the SMC, we've got NGC
376 imaged with the Hubble Space
Telescope here, which has this curious
sort of spike through the center of red
stars there. It's about 8 light years
across as a cluster. And it's a
beginning to dissipate. It's 28 million
years old now, which is still fairly
young for a cluster, but it seems to
have spat out and lost about 90% of its
original material. There's only 3,400
solar masses left, and the rest is
spreading outwards and beginning to be
absorbed into the rest of the SMC.
Now the two CL galaxies, the SMC and the
LMC have a bridge of gas and stars
linking the two together. You can see it
in this image here. This is an ev
evidence really that they have not only
interacted gravitationally with the
Milky Way but with each other in the
past and this tidal tail now stretches
from one to the other. And there are new
stars forming in the collapse of gas in
the tidal tail in this bridge of uh gas
and
stars.
And one further thing is that we might
actually be looking at three melenic
clouds.
Matthew Cetal proposed that this small
melenic cloud is actually split into two
parts and there is a smaller piece of it
behind 30,000 light years further away
from us. And this was confirmed in 2023
that the two parts really have distinct
populations of stars with separate age
functions and separate chemical
composition
uh ratios. And so does the gas that goes
to make them up. And so these really are
two
separate clouds, two separate dwarf
galaxies. So really we have the large
melaninic cloud, the small melanic cloud
and now the mini melenic cloud as well.
sadly not directly visible to us uh
easily because of the line of sight but
it's interesting that there is a third
member of the group and uh it's amazing
what you find when you're researching
these topics and I was looking into this
one and I did not know about this so
I've learned something as well and I
hope you have too. So, thanks very much
for listening and I'll just leave you
with this fantastic picture showing uh
the night sky over an observatory there.
Thanks a lot and we'll see you for
another video another time.